Stthomas/concepts-embeds (#40540)
dotnet/docs: docs/ai/conceptual/embeddings.md

---

> title: "Using Embeddings to Extend Your AI Model's Reach"

Author: thanks!

> title: "Using Embeddings to Extend Your AI Model's Reach"

Author: Thanks! Revised

description: "Learn how embeddings extend the limits and capabilities of AI models in prompt engineering in .NET."
author: catbutler
ms.topic: concept-article #Don't change.
ms.date: 04/11/2024

#customer intent: As a .NET developer, I want to understand how embeddings extend LLM limits and capabilities in .NET so that I have more options during prompt engineering and better outcomes for my AI apps.

---

# Embeddings in .NET

This article explains how embeddings work in .NET.

> Embeddings are a way you can give semantic memories to an LLM. Essentially, embeddings are numeric representations of non-numeric data that preserve its semantic value. You can use embeddings to help an AI model understand the meaning of inputs so that it can perform comparisons and transformations, such as summarizing text or creating images from text descriptions.

Author: thanks!

> Embeddings are a way you can give semantic memories to an LLM. Essentially, embeddings are numeric representations of non-numeric data that preserve its semantic value. You can use embeddings to help an AI model understand the meaning of inputs so that it can perform comparisons and transformations, such as summarizing text or creating images from text descriptions.

Author: revised

> Summarizing text is especially useful for [prompt engineering](prompt-engineering-in-dot-net.md), because it gives you a way to use far fewer tokens to repesent a given text. You use examples in prompt engineering to show an LLM what to do. However, LLMs limit the number of tokens per input, which constrains how much text you can include in examples. If you try to include more than the limit in one input, the model will ignore some or all of that input. Some LLMs also feature quota systems, another reason to watch your token counts.

Author: Yep, it's content for an instruction. I think it's more primary content than supporting, because the model applies the instruction to primary content, so it's much likelier to be long than supporting content. I'll revise, thanks!

> Summarizing text is especially useful for [prompt engineering](prompt-engineering-in-dot-net.md), because it gives you a way to use far fewer tokens to repesent a given text. You use examples in prompt engineering to show an LLM what to do. However, LLMs limit the number of tokens per input, which constrains how much text you can include in examples. If you try to include more than the limit in one input, the model will ignore some or all of that input. Some LLMs also feature quota systems, another reason to watch your token counts.

Author: revised

## Embeddings preserve semantic meaning

Embeddings turn non-numeric data into numeric data that preserves semantic meaning. Specifically, an embedding is an array of numeric values stored as a vector in a database that an LLM uses to compare embeddings. Two embeddings with similar vectors also have similar semantic values, such as an image and its alt text, or a course syllabus and the textbook for that course.

### Choosing embedding models to generate embeddings

> You generate embeddings for your raw data by using an embedding model: an AI model that can encode a piece of non-numeric data into a vector (a long array of numbers). The model can also decode an embedding into non-numeric data that has the same or similar meaning as the original, raw data. The embedding model you choose affects which data types you can generate embeddings for.

Author: Another odd piece of info I got from a doc on Learn. It made sense - whatever algorithm the model uses to generate values for the vector could just run backwards to take a vector and generate data. I need input from a SME...

> You generate embeddings for your raw data by using an embedding model: an AI model that can encode a piece of non-numeric data into a vector (a long array of numbers). The model can also decode an embedding into non-numeric data that has the same or similar meaning as the original, raw data. The embedding model you choose affects which data types you can generate embeddings for.

Reviewer: @alexwolfmsft do you know if embedding models can decode too?

> In Semantic Kernel, you build connectors for embedding models and databases into your kernel, so you can quickly pull in text data, and generate and store embeddings. This lets you use a vector database solution to store and retrieve semantic memories.

Author: thanks!

In Azure OpenAI, the service includes access to [embedding models](/azure/ai-services/openai/concepts/models#embeddings).

### Store and process embeddings in a vector database

> Vector databases are designed to store and process vectors, so they're a natural home for embeddings. Different vector databases offer different processing capabilities, so you should choose one based on your raw data and your goals. For information about your options, see [available vector database solutions](vector-dbs.md#available-vector-database-solutions).

Author: We're saying the same thing - SQL and Redis are vector databases because they support vector calculations. I'll try to rephrase.

## Use cases for embeddings

> This section lists the main use cases for embeddings.

Author: thanks!

### Increase the amount of text a model will process

Use embeddings to increase the amount of text a model will process, such as during [prompt engineering](prompt-engineering-in-dot-net.md).

> For example, suppose you want to include 500 pages of text in a prompt. The number of tokens for that much raw text will exceed the input token limit, making it impossible to directly include in a prompt. You can use embeddings to summarize and break down large amounts of that text into pieces that are small enough to fit in one input, and then assess the similarity of each piece to the entire raw text. Then you can choose a piece that best preserves the semantic meaning of the raw text and use it in your prompt without hitting the token limit.

Author: You could use a planner to automate it in SK. Plus the Redis code you just wrote seems like it could be used to do this. Also, it kind of sounds like retrieval-augmented generation - I'm waiting for alex to draft the RAG how-to before I finish the RAG conceptual doc, so I'll know more soon.

### More relevant and coherent text generation

Use embeddings to help models generate more relevant and coherent text. For example, embeddings can help the model to generate better stories, poems, jokes, slogans, captions, newsletters, and the like.

### Perform text classification, summarization, or translation

Use embeddings to help a model understand the meaning and context of text, and then classify, summarize, or translate that text. For example, you can use embeddings to help models classify texts as positive or negative, spam or not spam, news or opinion, etc.

### Turn text into images or images into text

> Use embeddings to help a model create images from text or vice versa, by converting different types of data into a common representation (that is, vectors). For example, you can use embeddings to help a model generate or describe images such as logos, faces, animals, and landscapes.

Author: Thanks! I added a bit - I need to do some reaserch before I can get more specific.

---
title: "How Embeddings Extend Your AI Model's Reach"
description: "Learn how embeddings extend the limits and capabilities of AI models in .NET."
author: catbutler
ms.topic: concept-article #Don't change.
ms.date: 04/11/2024

#customer intent: As a .NET developer, I want to understand how embeddings extend LLM limits and capabilities in .NET so that I have more semantic context and better outcomes for my AI apps.

---

# Embeddings in .NET

This article explains how embeddings work in .NET.

Embeddings are the way you express semantic meaning to an LLM. Essentially, embeddings are numeric representations of non-numeric data that preserve its semantic meaning. You can use embeddings to help an AI model understand the meaning of inputs so that it can perform comparisons and transformations, such as summarizing text or creating images from text descriptions. LLMs can use embeddings immediately, and you can store embeddings in vector databases to provide semantic memory for LLMs as-needed.

> Summarizing text is especially useful for [prompt engineering](/), because it gives you a way to use far fewer tokens to repesent a given text. You use instructions in prompt engineering to tell an LLM what to do, and can include text content with the instruction to give the model more context. However, LLMs limit the number of tokens per input, which constrains how much text you can include in prompts. If you try to include more than the limit in one input, the model will ignore some or all of that input. Some LLMs [charge per token](/pricing/details/cognitive-services/openai-service/) or have [quota systems](/azure/ai-services/openai/quotas-limits#regional-quota-limits), more reasons to watch your token counts. If you create an embedding for the text content you want to include, the LLM can find a shorter piece of text that has a similar vector, so you can use it instead of the original text to reduce the number of tokens you use to represent the content's meaning.

Reviewer: If you create an embedding for the text content you want to include, the LLM can find a shorter piece of text that has a similar vector, so you can use it instead of the original text to reduce the number of tokens you use to represent the content's meaning.

Does the LLM use the embedding to generate a shorter text that still counts towards the token limit or does it just use the embedding in addition to the rest of prompt? In the latter case you'd only have to worry about the tokens for the part of the prompt you haven't already calculated an embedding for.

Author: It uses the embeddings to find a shorter, similar piece of text and tokenizes that. It uses vector analysis to compare embeddings (long text, candidate short text) and pick the best short text to tokenize in lieu of the long text.

## Embeddings preserve semantic meaning

Embeddings turn non-numeric data into numeric data that represents semantic meaning. Specifically, an embedding is a vector&mdash;an array of numeric values&mdash; that an LLM uses to compare semantic meanings. Two embeddings with similar vectors also have similar semantic meanings, such as an image and its alt text, or a course syllabus and the textbook for that course.

> ### Choosing embedding models to generate embeddings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Choose an embedding model
```

Reviewer 2: The style guide wants us to avoid -ing words, especially in titles.

Author: ✅

You generate embeddings for your raw data by using an embedding model: an AI model that can encode a piece of non-numeric data into a vector (a long array of numbers). The model can also decode an embedding into non-numeric data that has the same or similar meaning as the original, raw data.

In Semantic Kernel, you use connectors to integrate embedding models and databases into your kernel, so you can quickly pull in text data, and generate and store embeddings. This lets you use a vector database solution to store and retrieve semantic memories.

In Azure OpenAI, the service includes access to [embedding models](/azure/ai-services/openai/concepts/models#embeddings).

### Store and process embeddings in a vector database

Vector databases are designed to store and process vectors, so they're a natural home for embeddings. Different vector databases offer different processing capabilities, so you should choose one based on your raw data and your goals. For information about your options, see [available vector database solutions](vector-databases.md#available-vector-database-solutions).

## Use cases for embeddings

> This section lists the main use cases for embeddings. LLMs can process text embeddings, but to use other data types you need to include a suitable embedding model, such as **dall-e-3** for image generation.

Reviewer: I think dall-e-3 is a generation model, not an embedding model. I think dall-e-3 uses CLIP as it's encoder. I found this research paper that talks about it: https://cdn.openai.com/papers/dall-e-3.pdf

Reviewer: Correction: Dall-E-3 uses "CLIP ViT-B/32" a very specific model for mapping text and images into the same vector space. If you want to talk about a more straight-forward image embedding model I'd suggest ViT: https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/vit

Author: Thank you! I wanted to link to the embedding model itself but I didn't want to link to CLIP given that Dall-E uses a custom version. ViT it is!

> This section lists the main use cases for embeddings. LLMs can process text embeddings, but to use other data types you need to include a suitable embedding model, such as **dall-e-3** for image generation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section lists the main use cases for embeddings. LLMs can process text embeddings, but to use other data types, you need to include a suitable embedding model, such as **DALL·E 3** for image generation.
```

> [!TIP]
> In Semantic Kernel, you can [use nested functions](/semantic-kernel/prompts/calling-nested-functions?tabs=Csharp#calling-a-nested-function) to integrate embeddings in your prompts.

### Use your own data to improve completion relevance

> Use your own databases to generate embeddings for your data and integrate it with an LLM to make it available for completions. This use of embeddings is called [retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)](/).

Reviewer 2: Should this link be added?

Author: The target isn't ready yet. Removing for now...

### Increase the amount of text you can fit in a prompt

> Use embeddings to increase the amount of text you can fit in a prompt, by reducing the number of tokens per word.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use embeddings to increase the amount of context you can fit in a prompt without increasing the number of tokens required.
```

### Perform text classification, summarization, or translation

Use embeddings to help a model understand the meaning and context of text, and then classify, summarize, or translate that text. For example, you can use embeddings to help models classify texts as positive or negative, spam or not spam, or news or opinion.

### Generate and transcribe audio

Use audio embeddings to process audio files or inputs in your app.

For example, [Speech service](/azure/ai-services/speech-service/) supports a range of audio embeddings, including [speech to text](/azure/ai-services/speech-service/speech-to-text) and [text to speech](/azure/ai-services/speech-service/text-to-speech). You can process audio in real-time or in batches.

### Turn text into images or images into text

> Semantic image processing requires image embeddings, which most LLMs can't generate. Use an image-embedding model to create vector embeddings for images. Then you can use those embeddings with an LLM to create or modify images using text or vice versa. For example, you can [use the DALL·E embedding model to generate images](/azure/ai-services/openai/dall-e-quickstart?tabs=dalle3%2Ccommand-line&pivots=programming-language-csharp) such as logos, faces, animals, and landscapes.

Reviewer: I don't think DALL-E is an embedding model. I think it's just a generation model.

Author: I'm not sure what the difference is - I can't find any info that distinguishes the two as separate. I found DALL-E listed on https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/concepts/models#embeddings

Author: As far as I can tell, DALL-E includes/leverages a modified CLIP model, which calculates the vectors.

Author: Basically, you need dall-e-3 for image<>text transformations using embeddings.

> Semantic image processing requires image embeddings, which most LLMs can't generate. Use an image-embedding model to create vector embeddings for images. Then you can use those embeddings with an LLM to create or modify images using text or vice versa. For example, you can [use the DALL-E embedding model to generate images](/azure/ai-services/openai/dall-e-quickstart?tabs=dalle3%2Ccommand-line&pivots=programming-language-csharp) such as logos, faces, animals, and landscapes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Semantic image processing requires image embeddings, which most LLMs can't generate. Use an image-embedding model to create vector embeddings for images. Then you can use those embeddings with an LLM to create or modify images using text or vice versa. For example, you can [use the DALL·E embedding model to generate images](/azure/ai-services/openai/dall-e-quickstart?tabs=dalle3%2Ccommand-line&pivots=programming-language-csharp) such as logos, faces, animals, and landscapes.
```

Reviewer 2: I got that from this URL: https://openai.com/dall-e-2
